Smallholder agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa is characterized by low productivity and diverse farming systems. Low input use is a well-known problem in the region, but soil acidity is also recognized as a potential constraint to crop production and nutrient-use efficiency (e.g., [de Pauw, 1994](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/003072709402300104)). Soil acidity develops because of (a) natural weathering processes associated with leaching of exchangeable cations, (b) agricultural practices associated with the use of acidifying fertilizers and (c) the removal of nutrients in harvested products. These processes contribute to low soil pH and to the accumulation of exchangeable acidity in the soil. Leaching of exchangeable cations is the main problem of soil acidity in the tropics as it is associated with aluminium toxicity that constrains root development and crop growth ([Sanchez, 2019](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/properties-and-management-of-soils-in-the-tropics/soil-acidity/5637B325D01CC4C25480CF8B031A76F4)).  


Amelioration of soil acidity via liming and other means can have large positive impacts on crop yield and food security outcomes, as shown by the Brazilian experience in the cerrado biome. Yet it also entails environmental problems such as greenhouse gas emissions and poses logistical constraints for smallholders given the bulkiness of agricultural lime or low availability of other acid soil management options (e.g., manure or ash). Despite renewed interest on soil acidity as a strategic priority for agricultural policy and investment in many African countries, the extent and causes of soil acidity are poorly understood in the region. Updated spatial data and new analytical tools offer scope to revisit research on acid soils in Africa and to inform decisions and policy making on strategic investments on food security and agricultural development.  


The purpose of this dashboard is to provide (1) a characterization of the magnitude and spatial distribution of soil acidity in sub-Saharan Africa based on cropland area, rural population, and value of production affected and (2) spatially explicit information on the likely returns to agricultural lime investments by farmers across in the region. This is a first step towards an updated characterization of the soil acidity problems in sub-Saharan Africa, as well as a first-order assessment of the returns to remediation efforts from the farmers perspective, which may assist both public and private sector actors to target investments in building agricultural lime value chains.
